# Evidence Lower Bound

*This is a lecture/paper note series where I publish my ersonal notes from when
I read couple of disparate things and try to make sense of it and store for
letter. The idea behind having it in open publication is to allow other people
to also have access to my personal notes, with the hope that it may help at
least one another person.*

## Introduction

Assume that a data generation process where a iid data $x$ is generated from a
latent variable $z$. The observation of $x$ raises interest in learning the data
generation process $p(x|z)$ and even the latent variables $z$ may be learnt from
data $x$. This can be done using Bayes rule. However, except for some strong
assumptions, the Bayes rule learning for posterior $p(z|x)$ can lead to
intractable integrals. Variational inference is one way of numerically
approximating such complicated probabilities even in the presence of intractable
integrals.

Our goal is to estimate the true distribution of $z$ parameterized by $\theta$
and expressed as $p_\theta(z)$ with an approximate $q_\phi(z)$ by finding an
algorithm that can use data and condition distributions on $x$ to get us a good estimate.

## Bayes Rule:

$$
\begin{align}
p_\theta (x) & = \int{p_\theta (x, z) \ dz} \\
             & = \int{p_\theta (x, z) * \dfrac{q_\phi(z)}{q_\phi(z)} \ dz} \\
\end{align}
$$

Taking log on both sides:

$$
\begin{align}
log \ p_\theta (x) & = 
log \LARGE\{ \normalsize\int{p_\theta (x, z) * \dfrac{q_\phi(z)}{q_\phi(z)} \
dz} \LARGE \} \\
& >= \int{q_\phi(z) * log(\dfrac{p_\theta (x, z)}{q_\phi(z)})} = ELBO
\end{align}
$$

The inequality follows from Jensen’s inequality f(𝔼[X])≤𝔼[f(X)]

The RHS term is called ELBO which is a function of $\theta$ and $\phi$.

Optimizing ELBO in terms of $\theta$ and $\phi$ gives a good estimate for lower
limits on $p_\theta(x)$, which in many use case can be used as a good guess for
$p_\theta(x)$.


The ELBO can be further broken down as:

$$
\begin{align}
ELBO & = \int{q_\phi(z) * log(\dfrac{p_\theta (x, z)}{q_\phi(z)})} \\
& = E_{q_\phi(z)}[log(\dfrac{p_\theta (x, z)}{q_\phi(z)})] \\
& = E_{q_\phi(z)}[log(\dfrac{p_\theta (x|z) * p_\theta (z)}{q_\phi(z)})] \\
& = E_{q_\phi(z)}[log(p_\theta (x|z)) + log(\dfrac{p_\theta (z)}{q_\phi(z)})] \\
& = E_{q_\phi(z)}[log(p_\theta (x|z))] + E_{q_\phi(z)}[log(\dfrac{p_\theta (z)}{q_\phi(z)})]\\
& = E_{q_\phi(z)}[log(p_\theta (x|z))] - KL(q_\phi(z) \ || \ p_\theta (z)))
\end{align}
$$

Maximizing ELBO can therefor be thought as optimizing this composite function of
two parts:

- The left term can be viewed as an analogous to reconstruction error in
  Auto-Encoders. Maximizing this term helps in maximizing ELBO.
- The right term is KL term between actual intractable prior and its
  approximation. Since it is negative, an ideal maximum of ELBO will have low
  value for KL term. By definition of KL divergence, its minimum possible value
  is 0 which happens if and only if: $q_\phi(x) = p_\theta(x)$

Optimizing this ELBO with respect to parameters $\theta, \phi$ result in
learning an approximate encoder $q_\phi(z|x)$ and decoder $q_\phi(x|z)$ which
can be used as best estimator for actual encoders $p_\theta(z|x)$ and decoder
$p_\theta(x|z)$ and thereby helps to estimate the entire data generation model.


## Further reading

- [Xitong Yang's
  blog: Understanding the Variational Lower Bound](https://xyang35.github.io/2017/04/14/variational-lower-bound/)


## References

- [1] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes,” arXiv:1312.6114 [cs, stat], May 2014, Accessed: Feb. 19, 2020. [Online]. Available: <http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114>
- [2] [Xitong Yang's
  blog: Understanding the Variational Lower Bound](https://xyang35.github.io/2017/04/14/variational-lower-bound/)
